(new age music)
Rarely have I seen such an impassioned presentation
as the one given by Andrew Harvey recently at the 2012
Tipping Point Conference in Vancouver, BC.
Andrew drew a standing ovation after challenging
each one of us to find our passion and turn it into
sacred activism.
Andrew, you just outraged half the people
in the room, and the others came to a point inside
themselves they didn't expect to find this weekend.
That point of passion, because this is a conference
about the tipping point, 2012 tipping point,
and you're saying that tipping point isn't going to happen
through good wishes alone and through meditating
in our air conditioned rooms alone.
It's going to take something much more than that.
And on that note, would you please, you were telling me
off camera this beautiful, reciting this beautiful poem
about passion from Roomey.
Well, let me just say something about this 2012 thing.
I take very seriously the Mayan prophecies,
but I don't take seriously the kind of market fantasies
that have been doled out by I think inscrupulous charlatans.
I came here to honor the Mayan prophecies,
and the Mayan prophecies fundamentally can be
interpreted in two ways.
That they are announcing the end of civilization
or the beginning of a new world.
Yes.
And I think both are true.
I think this civilization is doomed, it's going to end,
but that our only chance of getting to a new world,
of creating a new world is through getting real about
putting love and wisdom into what I call sacred activism.
All the rest is wishful thinking, fantasy.
All this bullshit about rainbow bridges coming down
on 2012 and taking us into other dimensions.
Believe me, 2013 will come, and we'll be in terrible shape,
if we're still here, and there'll be no rainbow bridges.
And the same challenge will be being put to the
human race by God, when will you love yourselves,
love life enough to get together, to establish compassion
and justice here on Earth in a real no-holds-barred,
no bullshit down home practical way?
I am sick of all of this new edge fantasy thinking.
I was always sick about it, but now as the world goes
through such horrific crisis and is about to enter
the storm of its evolution with destiny,
to have serious taken people saying this kind of stuff
in public to a public that's already stupified,
that's already in a coma, that's already passive,
that needs to be kicked up the ass and begged
to get together in love and passion to get going.
So let's get to the passion poem.
It's very true.
Get to that passion there,
because we got a lot of things to talk about.
Yes we will.
Please.
I'm on a roll.
I really tried today to give a coherent message
to everybody in that room
which is you can no longer be taken in
by this new age bullshit.
You have to get serious about the authentic transformation
which is breaking out of your comfort zone for love
and putting your life on the line for sacrificial service
at this moment when the whole world
and all of the animal race is in danger.
And you have to get going together.
You have to organize right now.
And you also have to understand
that this birth of a new humanity
isn't inevitable.
It's not just going to happen because you're fabulous
and you're beautiful and you're thin.
And you do yoga and you have vegetarian food.
And you speak in a self new age voice.
It's not gonna happen because you're adorable.
You're gonna have to sweat for it.
It's gonna have to be earned.
It's gonna have to be earned by deep inner work
and wise outer sacred work.
How could people even begin to understand the,
to entertain these narcissistic fantasies?
It's craziness.
And it breaks my heart.
But you know what, Andrew,
it appeals to a part of people
that does not have to put itself on the line.
Right, which is everybody at the moment.
Because at the moment, the crisis
hasn't absolutely hit the middle class,
the upper middle class.
It's going to hit that though.
I agree with you 100%.
It's going to hit big time.
Right.
Once it starts in stages,
it's gonna be like a snowball.
We'll mostly for the most part
feel very unprepared for.
We're not feeling it in this cocoon.
I travel all around the world.
Tell a Somalian that the crisis hasn't started.
Tell a Ugandan woman that the crisis hasn't started.
Tell an Indian peasant who's living on less
than a dollar a day that the crisis hasn't started.
Tell a snow leopard that's trying to survive
in the mountains, he's trying to protect himself
and his family from poachers.
Tell those people.
Tell those animals the crisis hasn't started.
Tell the villagers of Ecuador the crisis hasn't started.
We who are causing the crisis are by some horrific paradox
the last to know that the crisis is going on
because the empire that is devastating the world
has got wax in his ears.
Wax in its ears.
And can't here the screams of the poor.
And can't hear the howls of the dying animals.
And can't smell the oil that's actually reeking up the gulf.
And can't face anything because he's being kept
totally stupefied by a stupefying media.
Yes, Amen.
Let's get to this poem.
This poem by Rumi whom I also love.
Well, I love Rumi because Rumi is the great poet
of divine love.
And I love him to because he discovered that love
and all lovers of God discover this,
is not just peace.
Peace is very importance.
And serenity, serenity is very important.
I couldn't live my life without the deep peace,
and the deep serenity.
But what the great lovers of god discover is that
in divine love there is this unbelievable wild,
beautiful gorgeous naked energy.
And that gorgeous naked energy
is the energy of what in the Persian tradition
they call Ishk, passion.
It's actually the energy of the mother side of god.
The heart side.
Oh, I don't mind, I've got stain.
No it's not that.
Just in case you're thumping your chest on your microphone.
Oh. my microphone.
No because I have people,
I know that we're supposed to be sanitized an everything
and never sweat.
But I'm sweating because I'm loved.
And in this poem,
he describes the power of this thing they call ishk
which is the passion force of the god-head.
The force that is coming from the god-head
to transform everything.
And he goes and says
passion burns down every branch of exhaustion.
Passion is the supreme elixir and renews all things.
So don't sigh heavily, your brow bleak with boredom.
Dare to look for passion, passion, passion, passion.
Futile solutions decieve the force of passion.
They are bandits who extort money through lies.
Run, my friends.
Run far away from all false solutions.
Let divine passion triumph
and rebirth you in yourself.
What I was saying to everybody in that room was,
you are on drugs.
You're on the drugs of a stupefied capitalism.
You're on the drugs of a stupefied media.
And you're on the drugs of a new age
that is trying to addict you
to its wishful magical fantasies
and get you blissed out on nothing
so that you don't do anything real
about what really needs to be done right now.
And I can't join in that drug pushing
because to me, that keeps people
spiritual zombies.
At a moment when we have to have
real golden fireblood running in our veins
and wild hearts and brave minds.
And heroic,
heroic passion to do something real
about a world that is burning to death.
So that's why I love Rumi.
Because I know the truth of those words.
If I wasn't bathed in divine love,
and if I wasn't bathed in this fire,
I would be annihilated by what's happening out there
twice a day.
And annihilated by the stupor of the new age.
And annihilated by the incredible selfishness
of the CEOs and the corporations.
And then annihilated by the weakness and cowardice
of the governments.
And annihilated by what I know to be true
which is that we are losing the battle
for the future of the earth.
Unless something amazing happens
and a whole global revolution
of love and action starts going,
we might as well now just sing kumbaya
and take the Kool Aid.
Because until we get real and get going,
nothing real can get done.
But I'm not annihilated because
the passion for god, the passion of love for humanity,
the passion to bring this vision of sacred activism
is what gets me up every single morning
cause I know it's part of the only way through.
And people,
because of thie being narcotized,
Narcotized?
I mean, they're dead!
Yes.
And we are.
It starts out with a barrage,
if you do it this way,
of you wake up to your radio, right, in the morning.
And the news starts, the news starts.
And pretty soon within minutes,
you're having to blunt yourself from the harshness
of the realities that are taking place everyday.
And then pretty soon you're looking for other ways
to not feel it as the day goes on.
We're doing everything to not feel.
And you're told by so-called spiritual leaders
that if you say words like environmental destruction
or if you feel anxiety or if you feel terror,
that you're spiritually insufficient.
So there you're already narcotized.
And then you have faith teachers with faith mysticism
damping down your feelings even more
when your one chance of becoming a true human being
at this time,
is to become strong enough to allow your feelings
of pain and fear and heartbreak
to actually break over you
so that you can actually follow the truth in them,
the sacred truth hidden in them all,
and start doing something real about the world.
People go on and on about choosing love not fear.
That's a completely false distinction.
If I love you, and I suspect that if I had a chance,
I would love you.
If I love you, then,
if you're shooting up on crack.
I'm not gonna be sitting in the lotus position
watching you shoot up.
I am going to be afraid for your life,
afraid for your sanity, afraid for your health.
Afraid for your relationships, and I am going
to reach forward with everything that I am.
And I am going to use my whole repertoire,
my whole Maria Callas, Tina Turner,
repertoire of tricks to try and get you to grow sane
because I love you.
So if I love, I will be afraid.
If a mother loves a child, she's not going to just
let the child go across the highway,
she's gonna be afraid.
She's gonna teach it about life.
There is an aspect of fear that is sacred
because fear warns, fear wakes up,
fear makes us real.
So when these bloody new age teachers go on and on
about love not fear,
they are adding to the narcosis.
They're giving people more drugs
and they're not helping people do the real thing
which is to say there is an aspect about your fear
for the future of the world
which is absolutely real.
I am afraid too
because I, like you, love the world.
What we now need to do
is to be strong enough through spiritual practice
to face that fear, face that heartbreak.
Come together in real sacred action
and go out and do something.
Not tamp down the fear,
not make people who are shattered by heartbreak
and what happened,
feeling spiritually insufficient
because they're not bliss bunnies.
What kind of psychosis is this?
And this is the psychosis that they're selling
in the bizzare of the new age
and it's an outrage.
Well, it creates a very deep schism
within the minds and within the feeling bodies
of every one of us.
It creates a schizophrenia
which is already legislated by a corporate fascism
which wants us to keep relentlessly cheerful
as it rapes and degrades the world.
And wants us to be stupefied,
and wants us to be addicted to comfort
because that's how it controls us.
So if this mysticism, this fake mysticism
which teaches people how to materialize things
or so called,
which actually like this dreadful woman who wrote the secret
and the power is teaching people that the greatest power
in the world is the power to have what they want
at a time when millions are starving
and the forests are burning and nobody is getting
really what they want.
How could they in a world which is burning to death?
These people are actually part
of the corporate fascist agenda.
Because they keep people stupefied,
passive, paralyzed and greedy
at the time when we need to get out of all
of those things.
And it is an absolutely terrifying.
It is terrifying when you see
just how successful they are.
Because obviously,
in a time when people are radically in dread,
they'll grasp for anybody who will tell them
that they have no reason to be dreading.
Big daddy will look after you.
The corporations will look after you.
The government will look after you.
God will look after you.
And the rainbow bridges will come and look after you.
This is all part of the infantilization of the psyche
that goes on down in this corporate fascism.
And it is a disaster.
And yet one of the distinct features of humanity
is that this planet, these people have choice.
And it's the one thing we often do not employ.
We don't employ choice.
Because we're so heavily programmed to begin with.
Well it takes a lot of guts to make a choice
that doesn't fit in with the culture.
It takes a lot of guts to say,
don't talk to me about love not fear.
My love is afraid for the world
and my fear is sacred.
And I'm not gonna buy this bullshit anymore.
And don't talk to me about a god
that just wants me to just sit there
and pray for mcmansions and mercedes benzes
because I don't want that.
I want the poor to be fed and the fish
to stop being polluted.
That's what I want and you can't give me that
because you're not able to change the culture
that enslaves the poor and pollutes the seas.
You don't want me to know
that you want me to be greedy so that I don't wake up
to what you're doing.
And you're talking about
a progression of humanity and evolution into,
in the new age sense,
really acting now as one.
One, what's good for one is good for all.
And this is, in the true sense of the word,
this is what you're saying.
Well this is what they say they believe,
but you know damn well they don't believe that
because as soon as you ask them to do anything,
they vanish off into their hills clutching their crystals
and ohmming and schmoming.
If they believed about oneness,
they'd also believe in being one with the poor
and one with the seas that are polluted
and one with the horror of what's really happening.
They just believe in the kind of comfortable
Malibu oneness.
Not anything that will actually break their hearts open
or make them do anything.
I've talked to the new age for 20 years.
I don't know how I found the courage to go out there
again and again and do this again and again.
And I haven't,
I found a lot of talk about oneness,
but no realization of it, no organization of it.
No feeling one with the battered, the oppressed,
the horrible, the horribly afflicted.
All with those who are in terrible need.
It somehow stops short
of actually doing anything real.
It doesn't, yet at the same time,
those who are put on a pedestal
are those who took action.
Such as Gandhi.
You always hear reference to Gandhi
and Martin Luther King and so forth
even at new age conferences.
People will pay lip service in this charade,
this parody.
And that's what you're calling them on,
just keep paying the lip service.
You have the icons,
you trot in the icons.
They are Gandhi.
They are Martin Luther King.
Mother Teresa.
And perhaps sometimes Mandela.
And of course his holiness the Dalai Lama
who is an authentic sacred activist
who's really putting his life on the line.
And they trot this through.
But is anybody actually organizing like Gandhi
to unseat the corporate madness?
Is anybody actually risking his life
like Martin Luther King every single day
risked his life?
I've had death threats.
I've actually had death threats for years.
Because I stood up and denounced the guru system.
And I've had death threats doing this work.
Because it's radical.
Because it's not playing safe.
Because it makes enemies.
Because it's really rattling the corporate cages.
I'm not in anyway saying that I'm like
Martin Luther King but,
the people who invoke Martin Luther King,
they're being driven by chauffeur limousines
to their expensive hotel rooms.
What kind of bullshit is this?
Well, everybody that's listening
to this right now?
Are you enjoying this?
(laughing) everybody watching this
right now, I think you can understand
why there was an interesting reaction to you.
Albeit the most powerful reaction of the conference so far.
I think it was a tremendous reaction.
Everyone was standing on their feet.
It was wonderful.
I think the truth is,
that of course people, when I go face to face
like I do now, because I have no time to waste,
I am going to tell the truth even if it puts me
in a cement kimono.
I am bored with lies and I am not going to lie.
I'm gonna be myself.
I think that 80% of the people in that room
are incredibly grateful that somebody got up
and said what is actually on their minds
and in their hearts.
Judging from their
response, I would say
There was a standing ovation
and I was watching some people wince
when said things about rainbow bridges and stuff.
But I meant them to wince.
I want them to wince.
I want them to really hear me
that this is radioactive bullshit.
Look, I am a mystic.
I know that amazing extraordinary things happen.
I have seen rainbows appear.
I have seen radiant angels.
I have been talked to by Rumi.
I have had a whole variety of mystical experiences.
The highest kind through the grace of god.
But I also know that they belong to that dimension.
It's not this dimension.
They are there, they come to us
to inspire us to actually raise this dimension up.
Not to flee from this dimension,
but to actually put into practice the laws
of love and justice that you learn from that dimension.
And what the new age is doing
is using these incredibly beautiful mystical experiences
as a drug to sign off from actually doing the real work
that the divine wants humanity to do
which is to birth the divine in the human
and then birth the divine in science, in art,
in all institutions, in the way we live and
on the nature,
And in the new world and in education.
Everything, a real divine transformation.
This is a huge enterprise.
And it's nothing.
What the new age is doing, is just using,
as it does everything else
as we are a totally narcicisstic culture.
You know we use everything to flatter ourselves
instead of to get ourselves on our knees
doing real work to do the real transformation
in the real world.
I am sick of this.
And I, what was wonderful
is that I risked it in that room
and they seem to be sick of it too.
We shall see.
I was surprised to the degree
which that was true.
I really was.
I was actually sitting next to
some wonderful young people.
And as I go that's who I like,
He's obviously a decent person.
He must belief this rubbish, god bless him.
The guy next to me, behind me,
these young people were saying
this is such garbage.
This is such rubbish.
We are in such trouble.
All these people here, these upper-middle class people here.
They're paying to listen to this garbage
so that they won't do anything.
They'll just believe that it'll be enough
to sit there and vibrate and it will be done for them.
And I turn to them and I said,
I love what you're saying, help me.
And the guy looked at me with such sadness.
And he said I have listened to all the people
in this conference.
They're nice people.
But they're in a complete zoned out bubble.
They're not in the real world.
They can't lead us out of this crisis
because they're not facing this crisis.
They're in denial about this crisis.
They're completely selling their own
very well-marketed BS
which they've been getting famous and rich off for years.
And we have had it.
And that was what gave me the guts to go out
and give the speech I was,
because I was up to hat moment thinking,
I maybe I will just start to give a sweet speech
because I'm tired.
I've been traveling,.
But that young man's passion.
I wasn't going to fail him.
I was gonna give him something
to show him that not everybody in their 50s
in this new age circus is a neutered fat-cat idiot
purveying rubbish to people
at a time when the world is burning to death
and needs sacred action.
Andrew,
You may cut that last part.
We may.
No, don't cut it.
Let's get it out there.
They can think I'm crazy, but who cares?
Wasn't planning on it.
As you mentioned earlier, off camera,
it's not as though you don't spend your
contemplative time, your peaceful time,
your time in prayer.
As you say, pray and then do something.
Look, the revolution that I'm calling for
is a revolution that takes people deep
into the depths of peace and serenity.
So they can fuel passion of action in the world.
To be really as passionate as you need to be, I think,
you have to have a very strong foundation in peace.
If you want a burning candle to burn a long time,
it has to have a lot of golden wax to burn from.
I spend a great deal of time.
I wake up at five in the morning very often
and spend two hours in prayer and meditation
and in deep prayer to the mother
and in exercises.
I can't do this work at this level of energy
and at this level of commitment
unless I'm grounded in sacred practice.
Nobody can, that's why I call it
sacred activism.
Would you share with us some,
you have five different elements or principles
that you work with in your sacred activism.
Can you share them with us?
First of all, If you've been able to endure
the lunacy up to now,
go and get my book called
"The Hope: A guide to Sacred Activism".
It's probably the greatest book
ever written by a human being.
I'm joking.
I mean, that's the way they talk.
But it's my passionate plea to the world
to get real and get going.
And I try to give a guide map, a road map
to the whole transformation in it
that I understand.
The transformation into a divine humanity
that can act.
So until the book arrives,
can you give us a couple bullets?
Well I would think it's very important to,
first of all, let me define sacred activism.
I define sacred activism in the book
as the marriage of the two noblest fires in the human heart.
The fire of the mystic's passion for god
with the fire of the activist's passion for justice.
And when these two fires come together,
they fuse in a third fire.
Which is actually,
and this is the great, great revelation.
This is the fire of the mother side of god's love
for the creation.
It is a fiery love and wisdom in action.
It is the evolutionary fire.
And anybody who allows themselves to be possesed
by this fire will be turned into a radioactive,
divinely embodied sacred activist
capable of really doing extraordinary things
fearlessly and beautifully and calmly
and passionately in the world.
I have described my own journey
to this revelation.
And it is beautifully described
in a really grand quote by Teilhard de Chardin
when he says,
"Someday after we have mastered the tides
"and gravity, we shall harness the energies of love.
"And then for the second time in the history of humanity,
"We will have discovered fire."
This third fire is the fire that we are going to discover.
And it's going to be discovered by,
is being discovered by thousands of,
hundreds of thousands of people now.
And it brings together the mystic's passion
with the activist's passion for justice.
How do you birth this fire?
How do you birth it practically?
My book is a practical book.
It's exalted but it's down home.
And I say there are really five essential kinds
of service that you need to get downward
in the core of your life.
And right now, to be able to do this work,
first, service to god through thanksgiving
and gratitude and passion and adoration.
Because that service will allow the divine
and whatever you think of the divine,
whether you're a buddhist or a hindu or a christian,
doesn't matter.
This is the divine.
The divine energy, the spirit, call it what you will.
If you turn to it in the service of thanksgiving,
it will radiate you
with knowledge, with wisdom
and it will guide you in the core of your life.
And don't believe me, try it.
You'll be amazed by what happens
if you turn authentically in that way to god.
The second kind of service is service to yourself
but not this dreary new age narcissism which is so boring
but the real service.
And this has five different kinds of practices.
Cool practices
which enable you to calm down.
I'm very calm now.
Hot practices, which enable you
to keep your heart alive in difficult situations.
Prayer practices that enable you
to align yourself with the beloved
when you can't do the cool or the hot practices
which can happen.
It happened to Jesus in Gethsemane,
when all he could say was not my will
but thy will.
But that was enough to give him the direction
into the last part.
Body practices, physical practices
like the hot yoga i've just written about,
which is a very important self practices.
Which keep you supple to the divine energies.
And, shadow work.
Because without extensive and profound shadow work,
both the mystics and the activists
will remain narcissists.
The mystics will be addicted to transcendence,
and the activists will be addicted to burnout
and exhaustion.
So bringing those two kinds together,
the activist and the mystic requires both doing
extensive shadow work.
The third kind of service is service to all the beings
in your life.
Everybody you'll ever meet as a manifestation
of the divine.
Especially animals.
Because I think one of the great
real transformations the mother is asking of us
is to look at our horrific treatment of animals
and change it immediately.
The fourth kind of service is to get real
about this birth that's trying to take place
on a global scale
but get real about doing something with other people
in your local community.
So there are two things I suggest.
First, that you get up at three o'clock in the morning,
ask yourself the question,
what breaks your heart the most?
What breaks my heart the most?
And when you find
what breaks your heart the most
you are going to find a mission
that you can really devote yourself to.
Then get together with other people
in your local community.
Who share your heartbreak
or share the passion for a certain cause.
And create what I call networks of grace.
Cells of between six to 15 people.
Look at the back of my book and look on my website
networks of grace and you'll see how to describe it.
Networksofgrace.org.
And start really pooling your resources and passions
to do something.
I envisage a global revolution of love and wisdom in action
through these networks of grace.
Amazing things have already been done through them
all over the world so please join.
The fifth kind of service
is facing that you are now,
whether you like it or not,
a global citizen with responsibilities to put
your love into action in the way you vote,
in the way you invest, in the way you drive
and what you drive.
In the kind of livelihood you have,
you have to try to become radically congruent.
Otherwise, you are just serving the forces
of destruction and ignorance
and collusion.
We have to become a lot more authentic
on every level.
If you combine these five kinds of services,
my friends,
you will be born into the great transfiguring field
of sacred activism.
And you'll join the great loving army
of sacred activists such as being born all over the world
and is I believe destined to transform
the life of this planet
before it's too late.
Andrew, on that,
I don't think we need to go any further.
Because you're certainly beyond the traditional
type of inspiration here.
I think that you've,
If you haven't helped people delineate
that we can't ignore this any longer within themselves,
then it's not going to happen.
I think
that what is going to happen
is the mother is going to give us every chance.
But that's not going to look sweet.
She's going to bitch-slap us.
As hard as it takes to get us awake.
My profoundest prayer is that we can awake
before the devastation is too great.
And I'm going to do everything I can
to help that awakening happen.
But everybody listening must realize
that we are now going into the storm
of the greatest crisis of our entire history.
And that everything is possible.
And that eveything is at stake.
(new age music)
Andrew has offered over 30 books.
His most recent being "Hope: A guide to Sacred Activism".
Most of which you can find on Amazon.com
or through other major book sellers.
I think we all need to hear such a message now.
Because our participation is desperately needed
to create our new path for humanity.
You can learn more by visiting his site
at AndrewHarvey.net.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN..